Announcing PyTables 0.8
-----------------------

PyTables is a hierarchical database package designed to efficently
manage very large amounts of data. PyTables is built on top of the
HDF5 library and the numarray package. It features an object-oriented
interface that, combined with natural naming and C-code generated from
Pyrex sources, makes it a fast, yet extremely easy to use tool for
interactively save and retrieve large amounts of data. Besides, it
provides flexible indexed access on disk to anywhere in the data you
want to go.
 
On this release you will find:
       - a memory leak was fixed
       - memory consumption is being addressed and lowered
       - much faster opening of files
       - Some important index patterns cases in reads has been optimized

More in detail:

What's new
-----------

        - The meaning of the stop parameter in read() methods has
          changed. Now a value of 'None' means the last row, and a
          value of 0 (zero) means the first row. This is more
          consistent with the range() function in python and the
          __getitem__() special method in numarray.

	- The Table.read() has added the "numarray" value to the
          flavor parameter for completeness.

	- The UCL compressor has a checksum activated by default now

	- More native datatypes (H5T_VLEN and H5T_BITFIELD) are
          supported now when accessing native HDF5 files. So, the
          complete set of supported HDF5 dataypes are: H5T_INTEGER,
          H5T_FLOAT, H5T_BITFIELD, H5T_STRING, H5T_VLEN and
          H5T_COMPOUND (with any of the previous listed datatypes,
          plus H5T_ARRAY).  As you can see, H5T_ARRAY datatypes has
          been deprecated as atomic types in (E)Array objects for
          now. The reason is that selections inside atomic types does
          not work. If anyone is interested, H5T_ARRAY type migth be
          implemented in Arrays in the future.

	  Moreover, if a dataset contains unsupported datatypes, it
          will be ignored and not added to the object tree, so that
          you can continue to work with other possible supported
          objects. This behaviour has changed from previous versions,
          where a RuntimeError was issued in case of an unsupported
          object.

	  These improvements will enable PyTables to greatly enlarge
          the range of native HDF5 that can be read/modified.

        - Fixed a nasty memory leak located on the C libraries (it was
          happening during HDF5 attribute writes). After that, the
          memory consumption when using large object trees has dropped
          quite a bit. However, there remains some small leaks that
          has been tracked down to the underlying numarray
          library. These leaks has been reported, and hopefully they
          should be fixed more sooner than later.

        - Table buffers are built dinamically now, so if Tables are
	  not accessed for reading or writing this memory will not be
	  booked. This will help to reduce the memory consumption.

	- The opening of files with lots of nodes has been accelerated
	  between a factor 2 or 3. For example, a file with 10 groups
	  and 3000 tables that takes 9.3 seconds to open in 0.7.1, now
	  takes only 2.8 seconds.

	- The Table.read() method has been refactored and optimized
	  and some parts of its code has been moved to Pyrex. In
	  particular, in the special case of step=1, up to a factor 5
	  of speedup (reaching 160 MB/s on a Pentium4 @ 2 GHz) when
	  reading table contents can be achieved now.

What is a table?
----------------

A table is defined as a collection of records whose values are stored
in fixed-length fields. All records have the same structure and all
values in each field have the same data type.  The terms
"fixed-length" and "strict data types" seems to be quite a strange
requirement for an language like Python, that supports dynamic data
types, but they serve a useful function if the goal is to save very
large quantities of data (such as is generated by many scientific
applications, for example) in an efficient manner that reduces demand
on CPU time and I/O resources.

What is HDF5?
-------------

For those people who know nothing about HDF5, it is is a general
purpose library and file format for storing scientific data made at
NCSA. HDF5 can store two primary objects: datasets and groups. A
dataset is essentially a multidimensional array of data elements, and
a group is a structure for organizing objects in an HDF5 file. Using
these two basic constructs, one can create and store almost any kind of
scientific data structure, such as images, arrays of vectors, and
structured and unstructured grids. You can also mix and match them in
HDF5 files according to your needs.

Platforms
---------

I'm using Linux as the main development platform, but PyTables should
be easy to compile/install on other UNIX machines. This package has
also passed all the tests on a UltraSparc platform with Solaris 7 and
Solaris 8. It also compiles and passes all the tests on a SGI
Origin2000 with MIPS R12000 processors and running IRIX 6.5.

Regarding Windows platforms, PyTables has been tested with Windows
2000 and Windows XP, but it should also work with other flavors.

An example?
-----------

For online code examples, have a look at

http://pytables.sourceforge.net/tut/tutorial1-1.html

and 

http://pytables.sourceforge.net/tut/tutorial1-2.html

Web site
--------

Go to the PyTables web site for more details:

http://pytables.sourceforge.net/

Share your experience
---------------------

Let me know of any bugs, suggestions, gripes, kudos, etc. you may
have.

Have fun!

-- Francesc Alted
falted@openlc.org

