Copyright Notice and Statement for PyTables Pro Software Library and Utilities:

Copyright 2002-2007 by Carabos Coop. V.

COMMERCIAL LICENSE AGREEMENT FOR PYTABLES PRO APPLICATION SOFTWARE

IMPORTANT-READ CAREFULLY:

1. This Carabos Coop. V. End-User License Agreement ("Agreement") is a legal 
agreement between you (either an individual or a legal entity) ("Licensee") 
and Carabos Coop. V. ("Carabos") for the Carabos software product(s) 
accompanying this Agreement, which include(s) computer software and may 
include "online" or electronic documentation, associated media, and printed 
materials, including the source code, example programs and the documentation 
("Licensed Software").

2. By installing, copying, or otherwise using the Licensed Software, 
Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms of this Agreement. If Licensee does 
not agree to the terms of this Agreement, Licensee may not install, copy, or 
otherwise use the Licensed Software. Licensee may, however, return it to 
Licensee's place of purchase within 14 days of purchase for a full refund. 
In addition, by installing, copying, or otherwise using any updates or other 
components of the Licensed Software that Licensee receives separately as 
part of the Licensed Software ("Updates"), Licensee agrees to be bound by 
any additional license terms that accompany such Updates. If Licensee does 
not agree to the additional license terms that accompany such Updates, 
Licensee may not install, copy, or otherwise use such Updates.

3. The Licensed Software uses third party libraries or code (collectively 
"Third Party Libraries") to implement various functions. Third Party 
Libraries do not comprise part of the Licensed Software. Licensee 
acknowledges (1) that some Third Party Libraries may require additional 
licensing of copyright and patents from the owners of such, and (2) that 
distribution of any of the Licensed Software referencing any portion of a 
Third Party Library may require appropriate licensing from such third 
parties. For details, see the copyright notice of the individual packages. 
See Appendix 1 for a list of the Third Party Software distributed with the 
Licensed Software.

4. Upon Licensee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of this Agreement, 
Carabos grants Licensee the right to use the Licensed Software in the manner 
provided below.

GENERAL TERMS OF USE, COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

5. Carabos grants to Licensee as an individual a personal, non-transferable, 
perpetual license to make use and modifications of the Licensed Software. 
Licensee may install copies of the Licensed Software on an unlimited number 
of computers, provided that Licensee is the only individual using the 
Licensed Software.

6. The Licensee cannot distribute the Licensed Software to anybody (except 
Carabos) in any way. This restriction applies as well to modifications of 
the Licensed Software made by the Licensee.

WARRANTY DISCLAIMER

7. The Licensed Software is licensed to Licensee "as is". To the maximum 
extent permitted by applicable law, Carabos on behalf of itself and its 
suppliers, disclaims all warranties and conditions, either express or 
implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of 
merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title and 
non-infringement with regard to the Licensed Software.

LIMITATION OF LIABILITY

8. If, Carabos's warranty disclaimer notwithstanding, Carabos is held liable 
to Licensee, whether in contract, tort or any other legal theory, based on 
the Licensed Software, Carabos's entire liability to Licensee and Licensee's 
exclusive remedy shall be, at Carabos's option, either (A) return of the 
price Licensee paid for the Licensed Software, or (B) repair or replacement 
of the Licensed Software, provided Licensee returns to Carabos all copies of 
the Licensed Software as originally delivered to Licensee. Carabos shall not 
under any circumstances be liable to Licensee based on failure of the 
Licensed Software if the failure resulted from accident, abuse or 
misapplication, nor shall Carabos under any circumstances be liable for 
special damages, punitive or exemplary damages, damages for loss of profits 
or interruption of business or for loss or corruption of data. Any award of 
damages from Carabos to Licensee shall not exceed the total amount Licensee 
has paid to Carabos in connection with this Agreement.

Appendix 1
Third Party Libraries distributed with binary installers of the Licensed 
Software.
- HDF5
- NumPy
- ZLib
- Szip (decompressor only)
- Bzip2

Appendix 2
Copyright Notices of Included Third Party Libraries

See the LICENSES directory.
